= The Huff-n'-Puff Filter =

In scenarios where a considerable amount of data are downloaded or
uploaded using DSL or telephone modem lines, timekeeping quality can be
seriously degraded. This occurs because the traffic volume, and thus the
queuing delays, on the upload and download directions of transmission
can be very different. In many cases the apparent time errors are so
large as to exceed the step threshold and a step correction can occur
during and after the data transfer.

The huff-n'-puff filter is designed to correct the apparent time offset
in these cases. It depends on knowledge of the propagation delay when no
other traffic is present, such as during other than work hours. The
filter remembers the minimum delay over the most recent interval
measured usually in hours. Under conditions of large delay, the filter
corrects the apparent offset using the sign of the offset and the
difference between the apparent delay and minimum delay. The name of the
filter reflects the negative (huff) and positive (puff) correction,
which depends on the sign of the offset. The filter is activated by the
+tinker huffpuff+ command, as described in the
link:miscopt.html[Miscellaneous Options] page.

'''''

image:pic/flt4.gif[]

Figure 1. Huff-n'-Puff Wedge Scattergram

Figure 1 shows how the huff-n'-puff filter works. Recall from the
link:filter.html[Clock Filter Algorithm] page that the wedge scattergram
plots sample points ('x', 'y') corresponding to the measured delay and
offset, and that the limb lines are at slope Â±0.5. Note in the figure
that the samples are clustered close to the upper limb line,
representing heavy traffic in the download direction. The apparent
offset 'y'~0~ is near zero at the minimum delay 'x'~0~, which is near
0.1s. +
 
Thus, for a point ('x', 'y'), the true offset is::

  &theta; = 'y' - ('x' - 'x'~0~) / 2 for 'y' > 'y'~0~ at or near the upper limb line or
+  
&theta; = 'y' + ('x' - 'x'~0~) / 2 for 'y' < 'y'~0~ at or near the lower limb line.

In either case the associated delay is &delta; = 'x'.

In the interior of the wedge scattergram far from the limb lines, the
corrections are less effective and can lead to significant errors if the
area between the limb lines is heavily populated.

'''''

include::includes/footer.txt[]
